---
layout: post
title: "Unpacking Android Security: Part 4 - Insecure Authentication"
excerpt: "In this series of blog posts we take a look at Android Security in detail through the lens of the OWASP Top #10 threats to Mobile, with the end goal of learning how to write more secure code in our apps.<br><br>In this part we look at the #4 threat 'Insecure Authentication'"
categories: [Android, Security, OWASP]
comments: true
medium:
image:
  feature: /post/owasp-4.jpg
  credit: Felipe Furtado
  creditlink: https://unsplash.com/photos/qKtxuJOQpl0
---

👋 Hi and welcome to the fourth post in this series where we deep-dive into Android Security. This series focuses on the [Top 10 Mobile](https://owasp.org/www-project-mobile-top-10/) security threats as determined by [The Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) Foundation](https://owasp.org/), the leading application security community in our field.

Before checking this post, please consider checking out the previous one 'Insecure Communication' which is available on my site, and on Medium.

⚠️ Please note that this series is for educational purposes **only**. Remember to only test on apps where you have permission to do so and most of all, [don't be evil](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_be_evil). 

Finally, if you enjoy this series or have any feedback, [please drop me a message](https://twitter.com/sp4ghetticode). Thanks!

# Introduction

In this helping of my series on Android Security, we shall take a look into the #4 threat to mobile application security as determined by OWASP, "Insecure Authentication".

But what does authentication involve? Well, put simply, authentication is the process of verifying a user's "identity" is what they claim it to be. Once verified, this identity is then often used to authorize the user to access a service, data or other restricted resource. [^1]

Authentication is achieved by using *at least* one of three basic authentication factors: [^2]

#### 💭 **Something you <u>KNOW</u>**
* Such as a password, passphrase, user id, etc [^3]

#### 🎁 **Something you <u>HAVE</u>**
* An authorisation token, a physical crypto-key, an authentication code, etc 

#### 👀 **Something you <u>ARE</u>**
* Via your own biometrics. i.e. fingerprint(s) or forms of visual recognition such as facial/retinal recognition

In theory, the more of these factors that are used, the stronger the authentication *is* and the harder it becomes to pretend to be someone you aren't. This is in fact the guiding principle behind multi-factor-authentication (MFA) and hopefully something you are using already when it comes to your own authentication![^4]

That said, these individual authentication factors aren't foolproof and still require care to be taken by the developer in order to ensure the user is protected and your app is secure. So let's do just that!

# What's the passw*rd?

Something that certainly isn't unique to Android apps is users making poor decisions when it comes to password security. Given when data breaches occur the most common choices are usually `password`, `12345`, `qwerty` or similar variations, we can assume that when given the option users may opt for incredibly simplistic and insecure passwords.

However, as developers, we have a duty to ensure that when users create passwords they are as secure as possible by enforcing 'password policies' which will (hopefully) encourage users to create not only strong passwords, but also *unique* ones.

**"Ok, but what makes a good password policy?"** I quite clearly hear you say. I am so glad you asked 🤗 Here are some tips on how to come up with one.

1. **Set a minimum length** 

   Firstly, ensure your policy has a minimum length of characters that is required. It should be obvious that a longer password is generally more secure than a shorter one, but choosing a number that adds security and also allows users to generate passwords they will find memorable can be difficult. A good number for this task, and also recommended by the [National Institute of Standards and Technology](https://www.nist.gov/) (NIST), is **8 characters**.

   Ideally, you should also consider the maximum length of any passwords to be *at least* 64 characters to facilitate and enourage totally unique passwords or phrases.

2. **Reconsider the use of 'complexity requirements'** 
   When you read password policy you probably instinctively thought of rules that enforce a mix of letters, numbers, and special characters, as this fairly common place. The theoretical aim of rules of that nature is to make it more difficult for attackers to simply guess or use brute force to crack a password. However, guidance on this has shifted in recent years due to concerns that such complexity requirements actually lead users to create *more insecure* passwords[^5] 🤯.  In this case, perhaps less is more! Giving your users increased flexibility may encourage longer, harder to crack passwords.

3. **No hints allowed!**
   You may occasionally come across applications that ask you to supply a memorable phrase as a hint for future password recovery. This is certainly something you should avoid as it gives extra information to a potential attacker as users routinely choose hints which severely compromise their passwords 😅

4. **Knowledge is porridge**[^6]

   What was your first pet's name? Who was your favourite teacher? Where were you born? 

   

Once the password is created there's some further considerations

1. **Password expiration:** Setting a limit on how long a password can be used before it needs to be changed. This helps to limit the window of time during which an attacker can use a cracked password.
2. **History:** Preventing users from reusing passwords that they have used in the past. This helps to prevent attackers from using passwords that have been compromised in previous breaches.
3. **Use of password manager:** Encourage users to use password manager that can store their password securely.





### Next up 🚀

In the upcoming posts within this series, we shall explore more of the OWASP Top 10 for Mobile. Next up is #5 [Insufficient Cryptography](https://owasp.org/www-project-mobile-top-10/2016-risks/m5-insufficient-cryptography)

### Thanks 🌟

_Thanks as always for reading! I hope you found this post interesting, please feel free to tweet me with any feedback at [@Sp4ghettiCode](https://twitter.com/sp4ghetticode) and don't forget to clap, like, tweet, share, star etc_

#### Further Reading

* [owasp-top-five Companion App](https://github.com/ed-george/owasp-top-five)
* [M4: Insecure Authentication : OWASP Foundation](https://owasp.org/www-project-mobile-top-10/2016-risks/m4-insecure-authentication)
* [Security Queens: Mobster4 - Insecure Authentication](https://securityqueens.co.uk/mobster4-insecure-authentication/)
* [Android - Security Best Practices](https://developer.android.com/topic/security/best-practices) 
* [NIST Special Publication 800-63B - Digital Identity Guidelines](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63b.html#sec5) 

#### Footnotes

[^1]: Spolier alert, we will revisit authorization in a future blog! You can swot up in advance by checking out [OWASP - M6: Insecure Authorization](https://owasp.org/www-project-mobile-top-10/2016-risks/m6-insecure-authorization)

[^2]: You _could_ also use 'location' and 'behaviour' as seperate authentication factors. However, to keep it simple I have limited it to the most common 3 factors.

[^3]: Assuming that you, unlike me, can remember your passwords! In any case, I highly recommend a decent password manager such as [1Password](1password.com)

[^4]: Please use MFA whenever it's available. It usually takes no time at all to setup 

[^5]: For example, `JohnDoe@1992` could be cracked a lot easier than `android is my favourite mobile os`

[^6]: [One of my favourite 'Thick of It' quotes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cbLm--0Iudo) (NSFW)

